---
layout: post
title: Guide to Cookiecutter
category:
- Software
- Molecular simulation
excerpt: An introduction to Cookiecutter
---

I've recently been developing a Cookiecutter for
[mBuild](https://github.com/mosdef-hub/mbuild) and thought this would be good content for a blog
post.  mBuild is a Python package developed in our lab that is designed to
initialize systems for molecular simulation. 
Using mBuild, we hope for users to contribute their interesting molecular systems to
the project in the form of recipes.
However a problem we've noticed is that there is a certain level of
difficulty to developing these recipes.
[Cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is a package that creates
package templates for various projects with a single command, which I've used to develop a
template for mBuild recipes.  With Cookiecutter, I hope to lower the barrier of entry for users to
contribute recipes to mBuild.

### Why is Cookiecutter useful?

To explain why this package is useful, I'll first start off by saying that many of us in
computational sciences do not come from heavy computer science backgrounds.  Many of us are
engineers, chemists, physicists, etc. that have learned coding along the way to conduct our
research.  When I started graduate school, I had no experience with Python and my experience
learning was something like this:
1. Do excercises from [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learncodethehardway.org/python/) to learn and understand Python syntax
2. Write a collection of scripts to analyze data
3. Copy these scripts to multiple places on my local machine and computer clusters

If you can imagine, this way of writing code is not very reproducible and can get messy quickly.
For one, if you end up making changes to a script, there is no efficient way update this script
in all the other places this script is located.  Additionally, if you want to distribute these
scripts, there is no good way to test their functionality.  Thus, it's oftentimes better to put
your code into a package, rather than a collection of standalone scripts.  I won't go too much
into detail about Python packages, but you can learn more
[here](https://medium.com/@butteredwaffles/python-packages-and-modules-explained-part-1-ff304c4f19dd).
With a well-devloped
Python package, we have a collection of classes and functions that are reproducible and
adequately tested.  However, creating Python packages can hard for us non-computer science folk.

This is the pain point Cookiecutter was designed to alleviate.  With a project template, users
can easily create complex packages with a single command, which increases the adoption of your
project and can result in faster onboarding of new developers. 

Going back to mBuild, we have envisioned recipes as being Python packages that plug-in with
mBuild via [entry points](https://packaging.python.org/specifications/entry-points/).  The idea
behind this is to keep the recipes outside of the main mBuild library, while still being able to
import these recipes in Python via mBuild.  I developed this Cookiecutter template hoping to
provide a easy, uniform way for users to developer their interesting molecular systems to the
mBuild recipe library.

### How Cookiecutter works

The developer of a Cookiecutter is responsible for creating the skeletal structure of a package
template. The developer also creates a list of variables in `cookiecutter.json` that provides
instructions on how to build a project from the template.  With `cookiecutter.json`, the user is
prompted to specify various information about the package they are trying to build.  Cookiecutter then uses [jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/2.10.x/) templating to name the directories, files, classes, etc. appropriately based off the information given by the user.  The [Cookiecutter documentation](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html#) provides further explanation for how it all works.

### Example

To provide an example, let's look at the mBuild Cookiecutter, which can be downloaded from 
the GitHub repo
[here](https://github.com/rmatsum836/mbuild-cookiecutter).  Cookiecutter will also need to be
installed typing `pip install cookiecutter` on the command line.  To create the recipe repo, we 
type `cookiecutter mbuild-cookiecutter` in the directory the user wishes 
their recipe to be located.  Upon doing so, the user is prompted with the following:

```
project_name [ProjectName]: test_project
directory_name [test_project]: test_project
first_module_name [test_project]: first_module
first_plugin_name [Name of first class to plug-in with mBuild]: first_plugin
author_name [Your name (or your organization/company/team)]: John Smith
author_email [Your email (or your organization/company/team)]: email.com
description [A short description of the project.]: Test project
Select open_source_license:
1 - MIT
2 - BSD-3-Clause
3 - LGPLv3
Choose from 1, 2, 3 (1, 2, 3) [1]: 1
```

Based on the user-responses, Cookiecutter will create the recipe repo with jinja2 templating.  
Once created, we can view the contents of the recipe repo:

```
.
├── .travis.yml
├── LICENSE
├── README.md
├── devtools
│   ├── README.md
│   └── travis-ci
│       └── install.sh
├── requirements-dev.txt
├── requirements.txt
├── setup.py
└── test_project
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── first_module.py
    └── tests
        ├── __init__.py
        └── test_test_project.py

4 directories, 12 files

```

You'll see that based on the responses given, this repo contains a directory titled
`test_project` and within that directory contains our module title `first_module`.
Additionally, there is a test directory containing `test_test_project.py`, which is an outline
for unit tests with [PyTest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/).  There is also a `devtools`
directory and `.travis.yml` file within the repo, so that it's easy for the user to set up
continuous integration with their project.  Finally, if we peek inside `setup.py`, we can see the
following lines:

```
entry_points={
       'mbuild.plugins':[
       "first_plugin = test_project.first_module:first_plugin"
       ]
       }
```

Based on the user-specified information, the Cookiecutter has automatically connected the recipe
to mBuild via entry points in `setup.py`.  These are just a few of the features of the mBuild recipe
Cookiecutter, but hopefully you can see that alot of the burden of creating a Python package has
been removed from the user.  Thus the user can ultimately spend more time developing the actual
science.

I understand this is a pretty niche application, but Cookiecutter can be used to
create all kinds of package templates.  For example, I like the [MolSSI](https://github.com/MolSSI/cookiecutter-cms) and [Cookiecutter
Data Science](https://github.com/drivendata/cookiecutter-data-science).
