---
layout: post
title: Keeping Track of Units in Your Software: Introduction to Unyt
category:
- Software
- Molecular simulation
excerpt: An introduction to Unyt
---

When I was in my first semester at Clemson, I took an intro to engineering course that was
required for all engineering majors.  A large portion of this class focused on unit
conversions.  I remember the professor would always emphasize how important it was to keep
track of units in your calculations, citing a mistake in units that led to the cause of [Mars
Climate Orbiter crash](https://mars.nasa.gov/msp98/orbiter/).  While 100 million dollars
isn't on the line when dealing with units in molecular simulation, we certainly want to keep
track of them and avoid incorrect and unphysical systems.  

What makes units tricky in
molecular simulation is the shear amount of software packages available for initializing
systems, running simulations, and analysis, that all define different sets of base units. For
example, let's take a look at two popular simulation engines:
[GROMACS](http://www.gromacs.org) and [LAMMPS](https://lammps.sandia.gov).  GROMACS assumes
length and energy units in nanometers and kilojoules, while the `real` unit style in LAMMPS
assumes units of angstroms and kilocalories.  To make things more complicated, the analysis
packages also use different base units, as [MDTraj](http://mdtraj.org/1.9.3/) uses nanometers
as the base length unit and [MDAnalysis](https://www.mdanalysis.org/docs/index.html) uses
angstroms.  Hopefully this example gives you an idea of how cumbersome it can be to keep
track of units in a molecular simulation study.  This is where the
[Unyt](https://unyt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) package can help.

### Unyt

`Unyt` is a python package that is developed for working with data that has physical units.
The main data structures in `Unyt` are the `unyt_array` and `unyt_quantity`.  Spefically, the
`unyt_array` is a subclass of the `ndarray` in Numpy that carries a unit, while the
`unyt_quantity` is for scalar values with units attached.  The documentation provides a very
good overview of the package, but I wanted to go over several features that I've found
useful in my research.

### Basic Usage

Let's start off by initializing a `unyt_quantity` to a variable named `length`.

```
>>> import unyt as u
>>> length = 5 * u.nm
>>> print(length)
5 nm
```

Here, we create a `unyt_quantity` simply by multiplying the scalar value, 5, and the
nanometer `Unit` object.  When `length` is printed out, we see that it represents a value of
5 in units of nanometers.  Additionally, `Unyt` can keep track of units in mathematical
operations.  I will show this by calculating the volume of a cubic box that has dimensions of
5 nanometers:

```
>>> volume = length ** 3
>>> print(volume)
125 nm**3
```

Here, we took the `length` `unyt_quantity` to the power of three and set it to the variable
`volume`.  When `volume` is printed, we see that the correct units of cubic nanometers are
displayed.  What about unit conversions?  Unyt can handle that too with the
`unyt_quantity.to()` method.  Let's convert `length` from units of nanometers to angstroms.

```
>>> length.to('angstrom')
unyt_quantity(50., 'Å')
```

Unit quantities of different units can also be added and subtracted together.  In this case,
the units in the leftmost `unit_quantity` are returned:

```
>>> a = 5 * u.nm
>>> b = 4 * u.angstrom
>>> a + b
unyt_quantity(5.4, 'nm')
>>> b + a
unyt_quantity(54., 'Å')
```

The above examples just scratch the surface in terms of the functionality this package
offers.  However, I believe these basics will allow you to write scientific software that
elegantly handles physical units.  Next, I wanted to go over some more specific examples of
how `Unyt` is being used in molecular simulation.

### MoSDeF Cassandra
`MoSDeF Cassandra` is a Python wrapper for the [Cassandra](https://cassandra.nd.edu) Monte Carlo package.  
Specifically, this packages integrates with the [MoSDeF](https://mosdef.org) suite of tools developed in the McCabe and Cummings groups which initializes and paramterizes the molecular systems for simulation.  
Overall, `MoSDeF Cassandra` is a nice interface in Python for setting up and running
simulations with Cassandra.  Recently I have made a couple contributions to this package, one
of which being integration with `Unyt`.  The idea is to require users to define units for
physical quantities in order to prevent mistakes that arise from incorrect units.  Using
`Unyt`, we utilized all of the functionalities shown above in initializng `unit_quantity` objects
and converting to Cassandra base units.  In addition, we needed to write a function that
checked that the given `unyt_quantity` or `unyt_array` was in an acceptable unit.  Below is
the function written:

```
def validate_unit(unyt_array, dimension):
    if isinstance(unyt_array, u.unyt_array):

        @accepts(unyt_array=dimension)
        def _validate(unyt_array):
            return unyt_array

    else:
        raise TypeError("Argument must be a unyt_array")

    return _validate(unyt_array)
```

The `validate_unit` function takes two arguments: A `unyt_quatity` or `unyt_array` and a
`unyt.dimensions` object.  The `dimensions` object is the dimension for a physical quantity,
such as length, time, and temperature.  The goal then is to ensure that the given `unyt_quantity` matches the given dimensions.  
For example, a `unyt_quantity` with units of nanometers would match a `dimensions` object of `length`.  
Here, we use the `accepts` decorator in `Unyt` to check the `unyt_array` to the `dimensions`.  If the two objects are compatible, then this function will return the `unyt_quantity` as normal.  However, if the `unyt_array` is not compatible with the given `dimensions`, then an error will get raised.  Additionally, if a user simply provides an `int` or `float` object for a quantity that expects a `unyt_array` a TypeError will get raised.

### Unit Testing
`Unyt` also has some nice features that make it easy to write unit tests with Pytest.  Today I'm just
going to focus on the function `unyt.array.allclose_units`.  If you're familiar with `NumPy`, this is
similar to `numpy.allclose`, which checks if two arrays or quantities are within a specified tolerance.
The function `unyt.array.allclose_units` goes a step further and checks that two `unyt_array` or
`unyt_quantity` objects are equal to eacho other within a specified tolerance.  Let's look at an example
that shows off this function:

```
>>> import unyt
>>> a = 4 * unyt.nm
>>> b = 5 * unyt.nm
>>> unyt.allclose_units(a,b)
False
>>> b = 4 * unyt.m
>>> unyt.allclose_units(a,b)
False
>>> b = 4 * unyt.nm
>>> unyt.allclose_units(a,b)
True
```

In the first case, variables `a` and `b` are both in nanometers, but their values are different.
Therfore, when we run `allclose_units` `False` is returned.  In the second case, `a` and `b` both have
the same value but are in different units.  Again, `False` is returned.  In the last case, `a` and `b`
both have the same value and unit so `True` is returned.  Going back to unit testing, this function is
particularly useful when checking functions or methods that deal with unit conversions.  To give an
example, I will show a very simple example of a function that convert a `unyt_quantity` of length
dimensions to units of nanometers:

```
import unyt as u
from unyt import accepts

@accepts(unit_quantity=u.dimensions.length)
def convert_to_nm(unyt_quantity):
    """Convert a valid unyt_quantity of `length` dimensions to nanometers
    """
    unyt_quantity = unyt_quantity.to(u.nm)

    return unyt_quantity
```

Now here is a simple unit test that checks this functionality:

```
import pytest

def test_convert_to_nm():
    length = convert_to_nm(5 * u.angstrom)

    assert u.allclose_units(length, 0.5 * u.nm)
```

The unit test `test_convert_to_nm` calls the `convert_to_nm` function on a `unyt_quantity` that is 5
angstroms.  If `convert_to_nm` works as intended, the variable `length` should equal 0.5
nanometers.  To do so, we assert that `allclose_units(length, 0.5 * u.nm)` returns True.   In this
case, the test passed so my simple function works!

### Final Thoughts
Overall I've found `Unyt` to be a really useful package for all software development around
molecular simulation.  If you are writing any code that deals with physical units, I
highly recommend trying it out.  I also wanted to mention that we are using `Unyt` heavily in our
software package [General Molecular Simulation Object (GMSO)](https://github.com/mosdef-hub/gmso).
This package aims to represent chemical topologies for molecular simulation in a flexible manner.
We are implenting `Unyt` in the package to allow for units to be explicitly specified and easily
converted when writing out to various file formats.  Please check out our GitHub repository if you're in tracking our development.
